 By *ANTONIO REGALADO* and *JESSICA MINTZ*
*Staff Reporters of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL*
January 3, 2005; Page B1

When twenty-one-year-old Jordan Golson launched his Web diary, or blog,
in early December, his conservative views on news and politics weren't
exactly in demand, attracting about 10 surfers a day. But by last
Thursday, he was struggling to keep his site named "Cheese and
Crackers" up and running as it racked up 640,000 hits.

The difference: tsunami videos.

Mr. Golson's site -- at jlgolson.blogspot.com -- is just one of dozens
of locations on the Internet hosting amateur videos of the Indian Ocean
disaster. Many have been deluged with visitors eager to see more of the
gripping footage than TV offers, or to watch videos over and over again
on their own time. Some of these "video blogs," like Mr. Golson's, are
pre-existing text blogs, which typically include commentary and views
on current events.

Others have just sprung up in the last week. WaveofDestruction.org,
created by an Australian blogger to host tsunami videos, logged 682,366
unique visitors from last Wednesday through Sunday morning, and has
more than 25 amateur videos of the impact so far.

"The ease of putting something online is pretty much instant," says
Geoffrey Huntley, the founder of Wave of Destruction. "At a media
company, I'm sure there are channels you have to go through --
copyright, legal, editorial, etc. Blogging is instant."

Even before the tsunami, media watchers had predicted that 2005 would
be a big year for video blogging, also known as vlogging. Jay Rosen,
chair of the Department of Journalism at New York University and a
media blogger himself, says the unique videos of the waves hitting
shore could be a "breakthrough" event for the Web.

Last year, video bloggers already showed their muscle by rapidly
distributing a clip of singer Ashlee Simpson caught lip synching on
"Saturday Night Live," and another of the Daily Show's Jon Stewart
clashing with the hosts of CNN's "Crossfire." According to Andreas
Wacker, founder of blogsnow.com, a site that ranks blogs, the Crossfire
video was downloaded by more people on the Internet than saw it on TV.
"When the Internet wants to see something, it sees it," he says.

Even so, the genre is still in its infancy -- and like much on the Web,
its protocols are still evolving.

To obtain the videos, many bloggers linked to TV Web sites, pulled them
from Internet bulletin boards or snatched them from each other, in a
chaotic rush to make the unedited scenes available to curious surfers.
There's a big premium for dramatic videos showing the moment the waves
hit land.

Some TV networks, in turn, were alerted to amateur videos first by
bloggers.

A tourist in Thailand tries to help two others escape the tsunami in an
amateur video found on a blog.

Bloggers don't charge for access, but they haven't been paying for
copyrighted footage, either. And bloggers seldom ask each other for
permission. "The law really hasn't caught up," says Mr. Golson. "The
rule of thumb is you can take stuff as long as you say where you got it
from," and as long as you don't sell it, he adds.

The story of one particularly vivid video, labeled "Tsunami hitting
Phuket Beach" by Mr. Golson, is a case in point.

The video, which shows an elderly couple overpowered by a wave, was
filmed at the Kamala Beach Hotel near Phuket on Sunday morning by a
31-year-old factory worker from Sweden named Tommy Lorentsen.

Reached in Thailand, Mr. Lorentsen said he salvaged the tape from his
camera after it was soaked and gave a copy to Fredrik Bornesand, a
Stockholm police detective who appears in the footage trying to rescue
the couple. Mr. Bornesand handed a CD of the clip to journalists with
Norway's Dagbladet newspaper who then uploaded to their Web site on
Monday.

"It wasn't too steady a shot, but we thought it would be good to show
what happened," says Det. Bornesand.

The Phuket video has since been one of the most widely aired on
television networks, but only after bloggers spread the word. Mr.
Golson heard about it from other bloggers and posted it on his site on
Tuesday at 3:45 p.m. in Boston.

Dagbladet editor Oliver Orskaug says once the clip began circulating on
Web blogs and forums "suddenly the networks were calling from Japan,
Spain and France and everywhere to buy the video." He says within 12
hours he sold rights to CNN, ABC News, and others for a total of about
$20,000. Mr. Orskaug was not surprised bloggers grabbed the video
without paying. "That's the Internet. We expect that would happen," he
says.

The networks typically seem to ignore competition from news blogs that
post videos, although that may change as video-blogging expands. Bill
Wheatley, Vice President of NBC News, says during the last six months
the network has begun adding a digital watermark to its video "so
electronically we can determine if it's our video." He says the marking
is mostly to know if other TV stations are using its video, rather than
keeping tabs on the Internet. "But the day may come when we may need to
deal with that," he says.

Beyond copyright issues, videoblogs are facing another challenge
brought on by their sudden popularity: too little bandwidth, or the
amount of data they are able to transmit over a period of time.

For Mr. Golson, the rush came when the Drudge Report, a popular online
news site, posted a link to his tsunami videos on Tuesday afternoon,
just half an hour after he'd posted the films. Later that night, *Apple
Computer* Inc., which hosted his site, took them down. The video files
were so large, and so many people had tried to see them, that Mr.
Golson exceeded the limits Apple set on his account for the amount of
data his site was allowed to send. But offers to help store the files
poured in from other bloggers, and Mr. Golson spent the rest of the
week shuffling video files between about 20 different computers -- or
"mirror" sites -- that are now sharing the load.

Another blogger, known as "PunditGuy," wasn't so lucky; the rush on
the tsunami videos on his site cost him $1,000 in additional fees when
his service provider charged him for the extra activity bandwidth fees,
according to his Web site, www.punditguy.com.

Blogsnow's Mr. Wacker says the Internet has handled other popular
videos in a similarly ad hoc fashion, in which bloggers put out a call
for help storing big, popular files when their own servers crash. But
new file sharing programs are likely to make distribution more
efficient, and will make video blogging more commonplace.

The tsunami films may be a break-out moment for video blogs, but
observers say its still unclear where the phenomenon is headed. Jeff
Jarvis, a blogger at buzzmachine.com and the creator of Entertainment
Weekly magazine, predicts video blogging will evolve into "the new
definition of a TV show," especially as bloggers start to add their own
content and commentary to news footage.

He thinks producing a professional-looking TV-like program would cost
little, and suggests that advertisers, who are now just starting to
experiment with blog ads, could jump at the chance to run commercials
targeted to specific interest groups. "It's going to take a while to
get decent video content, and to get a critical mass coming in to
discover that content," says Mr. Jarvis. Most bloggers see posting the
videos as a pastime and a public service, with exposure on the Web as
recompense.

Kevin Aylward, who runs Wizbangblog.org, says blogs fulfilled an
important role in letting people experience the tragedy. "When you see
it, and you see how it's happening to just ordinary people, it brings
home the enormity of it. That is the fascination with the videos."